# PanIN and CAF Transitions in Pancreatic Carcinogenesis Revealed with Spatial Data Integration

## Alexander T.F. Bell, Jacob T. Mitchell, Ashley L. Kiemen, Melissa Lyman, Kohei Fujikura, Jae W. Lee, Erin Coyne, Sarah M. Shin, Sushma Nagaraj, Atul Deshpande, Pei-Hsun Wu, Dimitrios N. Sidiropoulos, Rossin Erbe, Jacob Stern, Rena Chan, Stephen Williams, James M. Chell, Lauren Ciotti, Jacquelyn W. Zimmerman, Denis Wirtz, Won Jin Ho, Neeha Zaidi, Elizabeth Thompson, Elizabeth M. Jaffee, Laura D. Wood, Elana J. Fertig, Luciane T. Kagohara

### Abstract

This study introduces a novel artificial intelligence method integrating imaging, spatial transcriptomics, and single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data to characterize neoplastic cell state transitions during tumorigenesis. This pipeline was applied to examine pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PanIN), one of the premalignant lesions that potentially develop into pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Previous characterization of PanINs within their microenvironment has been limited by their strict diagnosis on FFPE tissues. To overcome such limitation, we developed a new pipeline for unbiased whole transcriptome FFPE spatial profiling of PanINs that uses machine learning to classify and deconvolve the spatial transcriptomics spots, and to further integrate the spatial data with a PDAC scRNA-seq dataset. Our new integrated computational analysis method finds that cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF), including antigen-presenting CAFs, are located in close proximity to PanINs. We observed a transition from CAF-related inflammatory signaling to cellular proliferation during PanIN progression, and confirmed this finding with high-dimensional imaging proteomics and transcriptomics technologies. Altogether, this spatial multi-omics characterization provides a reference for future PanIN studies. The convergence of computational methods and technology development to decipher the spatiotemporal dynamics in this precancer atlas has broad applicability pan-cancer.
